=== PAGE 1 ===
 
ARTICLE 29  DATA PROTECTION WORKING PARTY 
 
 
 
 
 
This Working Party was set up under Article 29 of Directive 95/46/EC. It is an independent European advisory body o n data 
protection and privacy. Its tasks are described in Article 30 of Directive 95/46/EC and Article 15 of Directive 2002/58/EC. 
 
The secretariat is provided by Directorate C (Fundamental Rights and Union Citizenship) of the European Commission, 
Directorate General Justice, B-1049 Brussels, Belgium, Office No MO-59 02/013. 
 
Website: http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/index_en.htm   
 
   
00879/12/EN 
WP 194 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Opinion 04/2012 on Cookie Consent Exemption 
 
 
 
Adopted on 7 June 2012 
 
=== PAGE 2 ===
 2 
THE WORKING PARTY ON THE PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUALS WITH 
REGARD TO THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA 
 
set up by Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 
1995, 
 
having regard to Articles 29 and 30 paragraphs 1(a) and 3 of that Directive, 
 
having regard to its Rules of Procedure, 
HAS ADOPTED THE PRESENT OPINION 
 
1 Introduction 
Article 5.3 of Directive 2002/58/EC, as amended by Directive 2009/136/EC has reinforced 
the protection of users of electronic communication networks and services by requiring 
informed consent before information is stored or accessed in the user’s (or subscriber’s) 
terminal device. The requirement appl ies to all types of information stored or accessed in the 
user’s terminal device although the majority of discussion has centred on the usage of cookies 
as understood by the definition in RFC6265 1. As such, this opinion explains how the revised 
Article 5.3 impacts on the usage of cookies but the term should not be regarded as excluding 
similar technologies.  
 
Article 5.3 allows cookies to be exempted from the requirement of informed consent, if they 
satisfy one of the following criteria:  
CRITERION A: the cookie is used “ for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a 
communication over an electronic communications network”. 
CRITERION B:  the cookie is “ strictly necessary in order for the provider of an information 
society service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user to provide the service”. 
While the requirements for informed consent were already examined in detail by the Working 
Party in two Opinions2, this document is designed to analyze the exemptions to this principle, 
in the context of cookies and related technologies.  
 
This analysis is conducted without prejudice to the right to be informed and the eventual right 
to oppose set forth by Directive 95/46/EC, which apply to personal data processing whether 
cookies are used or not. 
2 Analysis 
2.1 Criterion A 
The inclusion of the phrase “sole purpose” in CRITERION A specifically limits the types of 
processing which may be undertaken using cookies and does not leave much room for 
                                                 
1  http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6265  
2  Opinion 2/2010 on “online behavioural advertising” 2/2010 and in Opinion 16/2011 on “the EASA/IAB Best 
Practice Recommendation on Online Behavioural Advertising”. 
=== PAGE 3 ===
 3 
interpretation. Simply using a cookie to assist, speed up or regula te the transmission of a 
communication over an electronic communications network is not sufficient. The 
transmission of the communication must not be possible without the use of the cookie. It can 
be noted that in the original version of Directive 2002/58/EC, Article 5.3 already included this 
exemption for cookies that were used “ for the sole purpose of carrying out or facilitating the 
transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network ”. The same 
wording was used in the revised direct ive, but the words “ or facilitating ” were removed, 
which could be interpreted as a further indication that the European Legislator intended to 
restrict the perimeter of the exemption afforded by Article 5.3 under CRITERION A.  
 
At least 3 elements that can be considered as strictly necessary for communications to take 
place over a network between two parties: 
1) The ability to route the information over the network, notably by identifying the 
communication endpoints. 
2) The ability to exchange data items in their  intended order, notably by numbering data 
packets, 
3) The ability to detect transmission errors or data loss. 
The terms “ the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications 
network” in CRITERION A –and in particular the word “ over”– are understood to refer to 
any type of data exchange that takes place with the use of an electronic communication 
network (as defined in Directive 2002/21/EC), potentially including “application level” data  
which fulfills at least one of the properties defined a bove, without limitation to technical data 
exchanges needed to establish the electronic communication network itself. 
 
As such, CRITERION A encompasses cookies that fulfil at least one of the properties defined 
above for Internet communications. 
2.2 Criterion B 
Similarly, the wording of CRITERION B suggests that the European Legislator intended to 
ensure that the test for qualifying for such an exemption must remain high. Following a direct 
reading of the directive, a cookie matching CRITERION B has to pass simultaneously the two 
following tests: 
1) The information society service has been explicitly requested by the user: the user (or 
subscriber) did a positive action to request a service with a clearly defined perimeter. 
2) The cookie is strictly needed to enable th e information society service: if cookies are 
disabled, the service will not work.  
Furthermore, recital 66 of Directive 2009/136/EC underlines that “ Exceptions to the 
obligation to provide information and offer the right to refuse should be limited to tho se 
situations where the technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate 
purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or 
user.” In other words, there has to be a clear link between the strict necessity of a cookie and 
the delivery of the service explicitly requested by the user for the exemption to apply. 
  
=== PAGE 4 ===
 4 
Even with such a reading of the directive, it remains to define what constitutes the scope of an 
“information society service explicitly re quested by the subscriber or user” . An information 
society service can be composed of many components, some of which are not used by all 
users or are provided for convenience. For example, an online newspaper can be free to access 
for all, but may provide some additional functionalities for users that are “logged -in” such as 
the ability to leave comments on articles. In turn these additional functionalities may operate 
with their own cookies. In this particular context, the Working Party considers that an 
information society service should be viewed as the sum of several functionalities, and that 
the precise scope of such a service may thus vary according to the functionalities requested by 
the user (or subscriber). 
 
As a consequence, CRITERION B can be rewr itten in terms of “functionalities” provided by 
an information society service. In these terms, a cookie matching CRITERION B would need 
to pass the following tests: 
1) A cookie is necessary to provide a specific functionality to the user (or subscriber): if 
cookies are disabled, the functionality will not be available. 
2) This functionality has been explicitly requested by the user  (or subscriber), as part of 
an information society service. 
2.3 Characteristics of a cookie  
Cookies are often categorized according to the following characteristics: 
1) Whether they are “session cookies” or “persistent cookie”. 
2) Whether they are “third party cookies” or not. 
A “session cookie” is a cookie that is automatically deleted when the user closes his browser, 
while a “persistent cookie” is a cookie that remains stored in the user’s terminal device until it 
reaches a defined expiration date (which can be minutes, days or several years in the future). 
 
The term “third party cookie” can be misleading: 
 In the context of European data prot ection, the Directive 95/46/EC defines a third 
party as “ any natural or legal person, public authority, agency or any other body 
other than the data subject, the controller, the processor and the persons who, under 
the direct authority of the controller or  the processor, are authorized to process the 
data.” A “third party cookie” would thus refer to a cookie set by a data controller that 
is distinct from the one that operates the website visited by the user (as defined by the 
current URL displayed in the address bar of the browser).  
 However, from the perspective of browsers, the notion of “third party” is solely 
defined by looking at the structure of the URL displayed in the address bar of the 
browser. In this case “third party cookies” are cookies that are  set by websites that 
belong to a domain that is distinct from the domain of the website visited by the user 
as displayed in the browser address bar, regardless of any consideration whether that  
entity is a distinct data controller or not.  
=== PAGE 5 ===
 5 
While these two approaches often overlap, they are not always equivalent. For the purpose of 
this opinion, we will follow the first approach and use the term “third party cookie” to 
describe cookies that are set by data controllers that do not operate the website curren tly 
visited by the user. Conversely, the term “first party cookie” will be used to refer to a cookie 
set by the data controller (or any of its processors) operating the website visited by the user, as 
defined by the URL that is usually displayed in the browser address bar.  
 
Certain characteristics will be taken into account to evaluate if a cookie is “ strictly necessary” 
for a service, “ explicitly requested by the user ” or limited to a “ sole purpose” as worded in 
CRITERION A or B.  
 
A cookie that is exempt ed from consent should have a lifespan that is in direct relation to the 
purpose it is used for, and must be set to expire once it is not needed, taking into account the 
reasonable expectations of the average user or subscriber. This suggests that cookies that 
match CRITERION A and B will likely be cookies that are set to expire when the browser 
session ends or even earlier. However, this is not always the case. For example, in the 
shopping basket scenario presented in the following section, a merchant coul d set the cookie 
either to persist past the end of the browser session or for a couple of hours in the future to 
take into account the fact that the user may accidentally close his browser and could have a 
reasonable expectation to recover the contents of his shopping basket when he returns to the 
merchant’s website in the following minutes. In other cases, the user may explicitly ask the 
service to remember some information from one session to another, which requires the use of 
persistent cookies to fulfil that purpose.  
 
Additionally, following the previous definitions, “third party” cookies are usually not “ strictly 
necessary” to the user visiting a website since these cookies are usually related to a service 
that is distinct from the one that has been “explicitly requested” by the user.  
 
As a consequence, “first party” session cookies are far more likely to be exempted from 
consent than “third party” persistent 3 cookies. But while these characteristics may serve as an 
initial indicator to prioritize comp liance actions, they are not sufficient alone to establish if a 
cookie matches CRITERION A or B. One can imagine a cookie being used to authenticate 
users logging into a website. This cookie is used to ensure that the user may only access 
content to which they are authorized. A similar cookie may be used to identify and track users 
across a domain and deliver tailored content or advertising based on the profile held by the 
website operator. Both cookies may be similar in type (i.e. session or persistent); h ave a 
similar expiration date; or indeed be controlled by third parties.  The risk to data protection 
comes from the purpose(s) of processing rather than the information contained within the 
cookie.  
 
Ultimately, it is thus the purpose and the specific imp lementation or processing being 
achieved that must be used to determine whether or not a cookie can be exempted from 
consent according to CRITERION A or B. 
                                                 
3  Some recent technologies often referred as “Ever -cookies” or “Zombie -cookies” allow cookies to remain 
permanently on the user’s terminal device despite reasonable efforts to remove the m. It is very unlikely that 
such cookies would be exempted from consent under any scenario. 
=== PAGE 6 ===
 6 
2.4 Multipurpose cookies 
While it is possible to use a cookie for several purposes, such a cookie may on ly be exempted 
from consent if all the distinct purposes for which the cookie is used are individually 
exempted from consent. 
 
For example, it is possible to create a cookie that has a unique name or value that can both be 
used for the purpose of rememberi ng user preferences and for the purpose of tracking. While 
remembering the user’s preferences may be considered in some circumstances to fall under an 
exemption (as illustrated in section 3.6), tracking is very unlikely to meet CRITERION A or 
B. As such, the website would still need to seek user consent for the tracking purpose. In 
practice, this should encourage website owners to use a different cookie for each distinct 
purpose.   
 
As already high lighted by the Working Party in Opinion 16/2012, if a website uses several 
cookies or cookies that cover several purposes, this does not mean that it must present a 
separate “banner” or consent request for each cookie or purpose. A single point of 
information and consent, presented in a clear and comprehensive manner is sufficient in most 
cases. 
3 Cookie use case scenarios 
This section applies the previously analyzed consent exemption criteria to common cookie 
use case scenarios. 
3.1 “User-input” cookies 
The term “user input cookies” can be used as a generic term to describe session cookies that 
are used to keep track of the user’s input in a series of message exchanges with a service 
provider in a consistent manner. These would be expected to be first party cooki es typically 
relying on a Session -ID (a random temporary unique number) and expire when the session 
ends at the latest. 
 
First party user input session cookies are typically used  to keep track of the user’s input  when 
filling online forms over several page s, or as a shopping cart , to keep track of the items the 
user has selected by clicking on a button (e.g. “add to my shopping cart”). 
 
These cookies are clearly needed to provide an information service explicitly requested by the 
user. Additionally, they ar e tied to a user’s action (such as clicking on a button or filling a 
form). As such these cookies are exempted under CRITERION B.  
3.2 Authentication cookies 
Authentication cookies are used to identify the user once he has logged in  (example: on an 
online banking website). These cookies are needed to allow users to authenticate themselves 
on successive visits to the website and gain access to authorized content, such as viewing their 
account balance, transactions, etc. Authentication cookies are usually session  cookies. The 
use of persistent cookies is also possible but they must not be regarded as identical, as 
discussed below. 
 
Field Code Changed
=== PAGE 7 ===
 7 
When a user logs in, he explicitly requests access to the content or functionality to which he is 
authorized. Without the use of an au thentication token stored in a cookie the user would have 
to provide a username/password on each page request. Therefore this authentication 
functionality is an essential part of the information society service he is explicitly requesting. 
As such these cookies are exempted under CRITERION B. 
 
However it is important to note that the user has only requested access to the site and specific 
functionality to perform the task he requires. The act of authentication must not be taken as an 
opportunity to use the cookie for other secondary purposes such as behavioural monitoring or 
advertising without consent.  
 
Persistent login cookies which store an authentication token across browser sessions are not 
exempted under CRITERION B. This is an important distinction b ecause the user may not be 
immediately aware of the fact that closing the browser will not clear their authentication 
settings. They may return to the website under the assumption that they are anonymous whilst 
in fact they are still logged in to the servi ce. The commonly seen method of using a checkbox 
and a simple information note such as “remember me (uses cookies)” next to the submit form 
would be an appropriate means of gaining consent therefore negating the need to apply an 
exemption in this case. 
3.3 User centric security cookies 
The exemption that applies to authentication cookies under CRITERION B (as previously 
described) can be extended to other cookies set for the specific task of increasing the security 
of the service that has been explicitly reques ted by the user. This is the case for example for 
cookies used to detect repeated failed login attempts on a website, or other similar 
mechanisms designed to protect the login system from abuses (though this may be a weak 
safeguard in practice). This exemption would not however cover the use of cookies that relate 
to the security of websites or third party services that have not been explicitly requested by 
the user.   
 
While login cookies are typically set to expire at the end of a session, user security c ookies 
are expected to have a longer lifespan to fulfil their security purpose. 
3.4 Multimedia player session cookies 
Multimedia player session cookies are used to store technical data needed to play back video 
or audio content , such as image quality, network link speed and buffering parameters. These 
multimedia session cookies are commonly known as “flash cookies”, so called because the 
most prevalent internet video technology in use today is Adobe Flash. As there is no long -
term need for this information they should expire once the session ends.  
 
When the user visits a website containing related text and video contents, both of these 
contents are equally part of a service explicitly requested by the user. The video display 
functionality thus matches CRITERION B.  
 
As already highlighted in Section 3.2, to benefit from the exemption, website operators must 
avoid the inclusion of additional information into the “flash” or other cookies which are not 
strictly necessary for the playback of the media content.  
Field Code Changed
=== PAGE 8 ===
 8 
3.5 Load balancing session cookies 
Load balancing is a technique that allows distributing the processing of web server requests 
over a pool of machines instead of just one. One of the techniques that are used to achieve 
load balancing is based on a “load balancer”: web requests from the users are directed to a 
load balancing gateway which forwards the request to one of the available internal servers in 
the pool. In some cases, this redirection needs to be persistent during a session: al l requests 
originating from a specific user must always be forwarded to the same server in the pool to 
maintain the consistency of the processing. Among several techniques, a cookie may be used 
to identify the server in the pool in order for the load balan cer to redirect the requests 
appropriately. These are session cookies. 
 
The information in the cookie has the sole purpose of identifying one of the communication 
endpoints (one of the servers in the pool) and is thus necessary to carry out the 
communication over the network. As such these cookies are exempted under CRITERION A.  
3.6 UI customization cookies 
User interface customization cookies are used to store a user’s preference regarding a service 
across web pages and not linked to other persistent identifi ers such as a username. They are 
only set if the user has explicitly requested the service to remember a certain piece of 
information, for example, by clicking on a button or ticking a box. They may be session 
cookies or have a lifespan counted in weeks or months, depending on their purpose. 
 
Typical examples of customization cookies are: 
  Language preference cookies  that are used to remember the language selected by a 
user on a multilingual website (e.g. by clicking on a “flag”). 
 Result display preference cookies that are used to remember the user’s preference 
regarding online search queries (e.g. by selecting the number of results per page).   
These customization functionalities are thus explicitly enabled by the user of an information 
society service (e.g . by clicking on button or ticking a box) although in the absence of 
additional information the intention of the user could not be interpreted as a preference to 
remember that choice for longer than a browser session (or no more than a few additional 
hours). As such only session (or short term) cookies storing such information are exempted 
under CRITERION B. The addition of additional information in a prominent location (e.g. 
“uses cookies” written next to the flag) would constitute sufficient information f or valid 
consent to remember the user’s preference for a longer duration, negating the requirement to 
apply an exemption in this case.   
3.7 Social plug-in content sharing cookies 
Many social networks propose “social plug -in modules” that website operators can  integrate 
in their platform notably to allow social networks users to share contents they like with their 
“friends” (and propose other related functionalities such as publishing comments). These 
plug-ins store and access cookies in the user’s terminal equ ipment in order to allow the social 
network to identify their members when they interact with these plug-ins. 
 
=== PAGE 9 ===
 9 
To address this use case, it is important to distinguish users who “logged -in” through their 
browser in a particular social network account, from  “non-logged-in” users who are either 
simply not a member of that specific social network or who have “disconnected” from their 
social network account. 
 
Since by definition social plug -ins are destined to members of a particular social network, 
they are not of any use for non members, and therefore do not match CRITERION B for those 
users. This can be extended to actual members of a social network who have explicitly 
“logged-out” of the platform, and as such do not expect to be “connected” to the social 
network anymore. Consent from non -members and “logged -out” members is thus needed 
before third party cookies can be used by social plug-ins. 
 
On the other hand, many “logged in” users expect to be able to use and access social plug -ins 
on third party websites . In this particular case, the cookie is strictly necessary for a 
functionality explicitly requested by the user and CRITERION B applies. Such cookies are 
session cookies 4: to serve their particular purpose, their lifespan should end when the user 
“logs-out” of his social network platform or if the browser is closed. Social networks that 
wish to use cookies for additional purposes (or a longer lifespan) beyond CRITERION B have 
ample opportunity to inform and gain consent from their members on the social net work 
platform itself.  
4 Non exempted cookies 
This section recalls or clarifies cookie usage scenarios do not fall in the exemption afforded 
under CRITERION A or B. 
4.1 Social plug-in tracking cookies 
As described previously, many social networks propose “social plug-in modules” that website 
owners can integrate in their platform, to provide some services than can be considered as 
“explicitly requested” by their members. However these modules can also be used to track 
individuals, both members and non-members, with third party cookies for additional purposes 
such as behavioural advertising, analytics or market research, for example. 
 
With such purposes, these cookies cannot be deemed to be “ strictly necessary” to provide a 
functionality explicitly requested by the  user. Therefore these tracking cookies cannot be 
exempted under CRITERION B. Without consent, it seems unlikely that there is any legal 
basis for social networks to collect data through social plug -ins about non -members of their 
network. By default, social plug-ins should thus not set a third party cookie in pages displayed 
to non -members. On the other hand, as previously noted, social networks have ample 
opportunity to collect consent from their members directly on their platform if they wish to 
conduct s uch tracking activities, having provided their users with clear and comprehensive 
information about this activity. 
4.2 Third party advertising 
Third party cookies used for behavioural advertising are not exempted from consent as 
already highlighted in detail b y the Working Party in Opinion 2/2010 and Opinion 16/2011. 
This requirement for consent naturally extends to all related third party operational cookies 
                                                 
4  Persistent authentication cookies have been demonstrated to be not exempt in section 3.2  
=== PAGE 10 ===
 10 
used in advertising including cookies used for the purpose of frequency capping, financial 
logging, ad affiliation, click fraud detection, research and market analysis, product 
improvement and debugging, as neither of these purposes can be considered to be related to a 
service or functionality of an information society service explicitly requested by the us er, as 
required by CRITERION B. 
 
In this regard, the Working Party has been actively participating since December 22, 2011 in 
the work of the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) to standardize the technology and the 
meaning of Do Not Track. In view of the fact  that cookies often contain unique identifiers, 
that allow for the tracking of user behaviour over time and across  websites and the possible 
combination of these identifiers with other identifying or identifiable data, the Working Party 
is concerned about the possible exclusion from Do Not Track of certain cookies that are said 
to be necessary for operational purposes. Such purposes are: Frequency Capping, Financial 
Logging, 3rd Party Auditing, Security, Contextual Content, Research and Market Analytics, 
Product Improvement and Debugging 5. In order for the Do Not Track standard to bring 
compliance to companies serving cookies to European citizens, Do Not Track must 
effectively mean “Do Not Collect” without exceptions.  Therefore where a user has expressed 
the preference to not be tracked (DNT=1) no identifier, for the purpose of tracking, must be 
set or otherwise processed. There are technical solutions available, and many more are 
currently being developed, to effectively apply privacy by design, both within  the web 
browser and on the server side to achieve the operational purposes described above.  
4.3 First party analytics 
Analytics are statistical audience measuring tools for websites, which often rely on cookies. 
These tools are notably used by website owners  to estimate the number of unique visitors, to 
detect the most preeminent search engine keywords that lead to a webpage or to track down 
website navigation issues. Analytics tools available today use a number of different data 
collection and analysis model s each of which present different data protection risks. A first -
party analytic system based on “first party” cookies clearly presents different risks compared 
to a third -party analytics system based on “third party” cookies. There are also tools which 
use “first party” cookies with the analysis performed by another party. This other party will be 
considered as a joint controller or as a processor depending on whether it uses the data for its 
own purposes or if it is prohibited to do so through technical or contractual arrangements. 
 
While they are often considered as a “strictly necessary” tool for website operators, they are 
not strictly necessary to provide a functionality explicitly requested by the user (or 
subscriber). In fact, the user can access all the functionalities provided by the website when 
such cookies are disabled. As a consequence, these cookies do not fall under the exemption 
defined in CRITERION A or B. 
 
However, the Working Party considers that first party analytics cookies are not likely  to 
create a privacy risk when they are strictly limited to first party aggregated statistical purposes 
and when they are used by websites that already provide clear information about these 
cookies in their privacy policy as well as adequate privacy safegu ards. Such safeguards are 
expected to include a user friendly mechanism to opt -out from any data collection and 
comprehensive anonymization mechanisms that are applied to other collected identifiable 
information such as IP addresses. 
 
                                                 
5  http://www.w3.org/TR/tracking-compliance/ 
=== PAGE 11 ===
 11 
In this regard, shoul d article 5.3 of the Directive 2002/58/EC be re -visited in the future, the 
European legislator might appropriately add a third exemption criterion to consent for cookies 
that are strictly limited to first party anonymized and aggregated statistical purposes. 
First party analytics should be clearly distinguished from third party analytics, which use a 
common third party cookie to collect navigation information related to users across distinct 
websites, and which pose a substantially greater risk to privacy.  
5 Summary and guid elines 
This analysis has shown that the following cookies can be exempted from informed consent 
under certain conditions if they are not used for additional purposes: 
1) User input cookies (session -id), for the duration of a session or persis tent cookies 
limited to a few hours in some cases. 
2) Authentication cookies, used for authenticated services, for the duration of a session. 
3) User centric security cookies, used to detect authentication abuses, for a limited 
persistent duration. 
4) Multimedia co ntent player session cookies, such as flash player cookies, for the 
duration of a session. 
5) Load balancing session cookies, for the duration of session. 
6) UI customization persistent cookies, for the duration of a session (or slightly more). 
7) Third party socia l plug-in content sharing cookies, for logged in members of a social 
network. 
Having regard to social networks, the working party notes however that the use of third party 
social plug-in cookies for other purposes than to provide a functionality explicitly  requested 
by their own members requires consent, notably if these purposes involve tracking users 
across websites. 
 
The working party recalls that third party advertising cookies cannot be exempted from 
consent, and further clarifies that consent would al so be needed for operational purposes 
related to third party advertising such as frequency capping, financial logging, ad affiliation, 
click fraud detection, research and market analysis, product improvement and debugging. 
While some operational purposes m ight certainly distinguish one user from another, in 
principle these purposes do not justify the use of unique identifiers. This point is of particular 
relevance in the context of the current discussions regarding the implementation of the Do 
Not Track standard in Europe. 
 
This analysis also shows that first party analytics cookies are not exempt from consent but 
pose limited privacy risks, provided reasonable safeguards are in place, including adequate 
information, the ability to opt-out easily and comprehensive anonymisation mechanisms. 
 
Some primary guidelines can be drawn from the analysis and the cookie use scenarios 
presented in this opinion: 
=== PAGE 12 ===
 12 
1) When applying CRITERION B, it is important to examine what is strictly necessary 
from the point of view of the user, not the service provider. 
2) If a cookie is used for several purposes, it can only benefit from an exemption to 
informed consent if each distinct purpose individually benefits from such an 
exemption. 
3) First party session cookies are far more likely to be  exempted from consent than third 
party persistent cookies. However the purpose of the cookie should always be the 
basis for evaluating if the exemption can be successfully applied rather than a 
technical feature of the cookie.  
Ultimately, to decide if a cookie is exempt from the principle of informed consent it is 
important to verify carefully if it fulfils one of the two exemption criteria defined in Article 
5.3 as modified by Directive 2009/136/EC. After a careful examination, if substantial doubts 
remain on whether or not an exemption criterion applies, website operators should closely 
examine if there is not in practice an opportunity to gain consent from users in a simple 
unobtrusive way, thus avoiding any legal uncertainty. 
Done at Brussels, on 7th June 2012 
 
      
For the Working Party 
The Chairman 
Jacob KOHNSTAMM 
 